---
layout: post
title: Week 5 - Lists
date: 2023-02-25 23:59 +1100
categories: 23T1
expires: 2023-09-09 23:59:59 +1100
---

* TOC
{:toc}

## Lists

Previously, we have only assigned one value to a variable at one time, but 
sometimes, we need to be able to store an arbitrarily large number of values. 
Instead of creating a large number of variables, we can put all our values 
into one variable in a list. In Python, a list is a collection of items that 
are ordered and mutable. 

### Creating Lists
Lists are defined by enclosing a comma-separated sequence of elements inside 
square brackets `[]`. We can also use the function `list()` instead of the 
square brackets. 

```python
my_list = [1, 2, "apple", "orange", True]
```

### Accessing items
To access individual items in the list, we use square brackets with an index 
inside, the same as getting a letter from a string. Furthermore, we can also 
use the same string slicing behaviour on lists to get subsets.

```python
my_list[1:4]  # Returns [2, "apple", "orange"]
```

We can also use negative indexing to access elements from the end of the list:

```python
my_list[-1]  # Returns True
my_list[-2]  # Returns "orange"
```

### Adding items
We can add items to the list by using the `listName.append(value)` function.

```python
my_list[-1]  # Returns True

my_list.append("last")

my_list[-1]  # Returns "last"
```

### Removing items
We can remove the last item in a list with `listName.pop()`.

```python
last = my_list.pop()

last  # Returns "last"
my_list[-1]  # Returns True
```

Finally, we can remove specific values from a list. This will only remove the first matching item in the list
`listName.remove(value)`.

```python
my_list[0]  # Returns 1

my_list.remove(1)

my_list[0]  # Returns 2
```

### Looping
We can also loop over all items in a list with `for` loops:

```python
for item in my_list:
    print(item)
```

### Further functions and documentation
There are more functions that are available for you to look at in the 
documentation: [docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html)

## Tasks:
Sample lists:

```sample1 = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 1, 2, 1, 3, 4, 5, 5]```

```sample2 = [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]```

```sample3 = [9, 7, 5, 3, 1]```

```sample4 = [1, 4, 8, 12, 16]```

1. Using sample list 1, find the number of unique values, and the number of 
   repetitions.
3. Find the list of common items in sample list 1 and 2.
4. Check if sample list 2 and 3 are palindromes.
5. Merge and sort lists 2 and 4 without using the `sort()` function
6. Find the nth (for any arbitrary n) smallest value in a list.
7. Find the most frequent item in a list (test with list 1).
8. Compute the sum of all items in a list.
9. Compute the product of all items in a list.
10. Find the smallest and largest items in a list.
11. Given two arrays, multiply the elements at each index from arrays and store 
    the result in a third array. If the given two arrays differ in length, excess 
    elements of the larger array will be added on at the end.
